- [Domain Specific Langauage (DSL) description](#domain-specific-langauage-dsl-description)
- [Full documentation of current DSL commands](#full-documentation-of-current-dsl-commands)
  - [ARAX_resultify](#arax_resultify)
    - [`resultify(action=resultify)`](#resultifyactionresultify)
  - [ARAX_overlay](#arax_overlay)
    - [`overlay(action=compute_ngd)`](#overlayactioncompute_ngd)
    - [`overlay(action=add_node_pmids)`](#overlayactionadd_node_pmids)
    - [`overlay(action=overlay_clinical_info)`](#overlayactionoverlay_clinical_info)
    - [`overlay(action=compute_jaccard)`](#overlayactioncompute_jaccard)
  - [ARAX_filter_kg](#arax_filter_kg)
    - [`filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_property)`](#filter_kgactionremove_edges_by_property)
    - [`filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_type)`](#filter_kgactionremove_edges_by_type)
    - [`filter_kg(action=remove_nodes_by_type)`](#filter_kgactionremove_nodes_by_type)
    - [`filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_attribute)`](#filter_kgactionremove_edges_by_attribute)
  - [ARAX_messenger](#arax_messenger)
    - [`create_message(action=None)`](#create_messageactionnone)
    - [`create_message(action=None)`](#create_messageactionnone-1)
    - [`create_message(action=None)`](#create_messageactionnone-2)

# Domain Specific Langauage (DSL) description
This document describes the features and components of the DSL developed for the ARA Expander team.

Full documentation is given below, but an example can help: in the API specification, there is field called `Query.previous_message_processing_plan.processing_actions:`,
while initially an empty list, a set of processing actions can be applied with something along the lines of:

```
[
"add_qnode(name=hypertension, id=n00)",  # add a new node to the query graph
"add_qnode(type=protein, is_set=True, id=n01)",  # add a new set of nodes of a certain type to the query graph
"add_qedge(source_id=n01, target_id=n00, id=e00)",  # add an edge connecting these two nodes
"expand(edge_id=e00)",  # reach out to knowledge providers to find all subgraphs that satisfy these new query nodes/edges
"overlay(action=compute_ngd)",  # overlay each edge with the normalized Google distance (a metric based on Edge.source_id and Edge.target_id co-occurrence frequency in all PubMed abstracts)
"filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_attribute, edge_attribute=ngd, direction=above, threshold=0.85, remove_connected_nodes=t, qnode_id=n01)",  # remove all edges with normalized google distance above 0.85 as well as the connected protein
"return(message=true, store=false)"  # return the message to the ARS
]
```
 
# Full documentation of current DSL commands
## ARAX_resultify
### `resultify(action=resultify)`
 Creates a list of results from the input query graph (QG) based on the the information contained in the message knowledge graph (KG). Every subgraph through the KG that satisfies the GQ is returned. Such use cases include: 
- `resultify()` Returns all subgraphs in the knowledge graph that satisfy the query graph
- `resultify(force_isset_false=[n01])` This forces each result to include only one example of node `n01` if it was originally part of a set in the QG. An example where one might use this mode is: suppose that the preceding DSL commands constructed a knowledge graph containing several proteins that are targets of a given drug, by making the protein node (suppose it is called `n01`) on the query graph have `is_set=true`. To extract one subgraph for each such protein, one would use `resultify(force_isset_false=[n01])`. The brackets around `n01` are because it is a list; in fact, multiple node IDs can be specified there, if they are separated by commas.
- `resultiy(ignore_edge_direction=false)` This mode checks edge directions in the QG to ensure that matching an edge in the KG to an edge in the QG is only allowed if the two edges point in the same direction. The default is to not check edge direction. For example, you may want to include results that include relationships like `(protein)-[involved_in]->(pathway)` even though the underlying KG only contains directional edges of the form `(protein)<-[involved_in]-(pathway)`.
Note that this command will successfully execute given an arbitrary query graph and knowledge graph provided by the automated reasoning system, not just ones generated by Team ARA Expander.

||||
|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| force_isset_false | ignore_edge_direction |
|_DSL arguments_| {'set of `id` strings of nodes in the QG. Optional; default = empty set.'} | {'`true` or `false`. Optional; default is `true`.'} |

## ARAX_overlay
### `overlay(action=compute_ngd)`
`compute_ngd` computes a metric (called the normalized Google distance) based on edge soure/target node co-occurrence in abstracts of all PubMed articles.
            This information is then included as an edge attribute.
            You have the choice of applying this to all edges in the knowledge graph, or only between specified source/target qnode id's. If the later, virtual edges are added with the type specified by `virtual_edge_type`.

||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| default_value | virtual_edge_type | source_qnode_id | target_qnode_id |
|_DSL arguments_| {'0', 'inf'} | {'any string label (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} | {'a specific source query node id (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} | {'a specific target query node id (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} |

### `overlay(action=add_node_pmids)`
`add_node_pmids` adds PubMed PMID's as node attributes to each node in the knowledge graph.
            This information is obtained from mapping node identifiers to MeSH terms and obtaining which PubMed articles have this MeSH term
            either labeling in the metadata or has the MeSH term occurring in the abstract of the article.

|||
|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| max_num |
|_DSL arguments_| {0, 'all'} |

### `overlay(action=overlay_clinical_info)`
`overlay_clinical_info` overlay edges with information obtained from the knowledge provider (KP) Columbia Open Health Data (COHD).
            This KP has a number of different functionalities, such as `paired_concept_frequenc`, `observed_expected_ratio`, etc. which are mutually exclusive DSL parameters.
            All information is derived from a 5 year hierarchical dataset: Counts for each concept include patients from descendant concepts. 
            This includes clinical data from 2013-2017 and includes 1,731,858 different patients.
            This information is then included as an edge attribute.
            You have the choice of applying this to all edges in the knowledge graph, or only between specified source/target qnode id's. If the later, virtual edges are added with the type specified by `virtual_edge_type`.

||||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| paired_concept_freq | observed_expected_ratio | chi_square | virtual_edge_type | source_qnode_id | target_qnode_id |
|_DSL arguments_| {'false', 'true'} | {'false', 'true'} | {'false', 'true'} | {'any string label (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} | {'a specific source query node id (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} | {'a specific target query node id (optional, otherwise applied to all edges)'} |

### `overlay(action=compute_jaccard)`
`compute_jaccard` creates virtual edges and adds an edge attribute containing the following information:
            The jaccard similarity measures how many `intermediate_node_id`'s are shared in common between each `start_node_id` and `target_node_id`.
            This is used for purposes such as "find me all drugs (`start_node_id`) that have many proteins (`intermediate_node_id`) in common with this disease (`end_node_id`)."
            This can be used for downstream filtering to concentrate on relevant bioentities.
            

||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| start_node_id | intermediate_node_id | end_node_id | virtual_edge_type |
|_DSL arguments_| {'a node id (required)'} | {'a query node id (required)'} | {'a query node id (required)'} | {'any string label (required)'} |

## ARAX_filter_kg
### `filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_property)`

`remove_edges_by_property` removes edges from the knowledge graph (KG) based on a given edge property.
Use cases include:
                
* removing all edges that were provided by a certain knowledge provider (KP) via `edge_property=provided, property_value=Pharos` to remove all edges provided by the KP Pharos.
* removing all edges that connect to a certain node via `edge_property=source_id, property_value=DOID:8398`
* removing all edges with a certain relation via `edge_property=relation, property_value=upregulates`
* removing all edges provided by another ARA via `edge_property=is_defined_by, property_value=ARAX/RTX`
* etc. etc.
                
You have the option to either remove all connected nodes to such edges (via `remove_connected_nodes=t`), or
else, only remove a single source/target node based on a query node id (via `remove_connected_nodes=t, qnode_id=<a query node id.>`
                
This can be applied to an arbitrary knowledge graph as possible edge properties are computed dynamically (i.e. not just those created/recognized by the ARA Expander team).


||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| edge_property | property_value | remove_connected_nodes | qnode_id |
|_DSL arguments_| {'an edge property'} | {'a value for the edge property'} | {'False', 'T', 'F', 'true', 'True', 'f', 't', 'false'} | {'a specific query node id to remove'} |

### `filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_type)`

`remove_edges_by_type` removes edges from the knowledge graph (KG) based on a given edge type.
Use cases include:
             
* removing all edges that have `edge_type=contraindicated_for`. 
* if virtual edges have been introduced with `overlay()` DSL commands, this action can remove all of them.
* etc.
            
You have the option to either remove all connected nodes to such edges (via `remove_connected_nodes=t`), or
else, only remove a single source/target node based on a query node id (via `remove_connected_nodes=t, qnode_id=<a query node id.>`
            
This can be applied to an arbitrary knowledge graph as possible edge types are computed dynamically (i.e. not just those created/recognized by the ARA Expander team).


|||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| edge_type | remove_connected_nodes | qnode_id |
|_DSL arguments_| {'an edge type'} | {'False', 'T', 'F', 'true', 'True', 'f', 't', 'false'} | {'a specific query node id to remove'} |

### `filter_kg(action=remove_nodes_by_type)`

`remove_node_by_type` removes nodes from the knowledge graph (KG) based on a given node type.
Use cases include:
* removing all nodes that have `node_type=protein`.
* removing all nodes that have `node_type=chemical_substance`.
* etc.
This can be applied to an arbitrary knowledge graph as possible node types are computed dynamically (i.e. not just those created/recognized by the ARA Expander team).


|||
|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| node_type |
|_DSL arguments_| {'a node type'} |

### `filter_kg(action=remove_edges_by_attribute)`

`remove_edges_by_attribute` removes edges from the knowledge graph (KG) based on a a certain edge attribute.
Edge attributes are a list of additional attributes for an edge.
This action interacts particularly well with `overlay()` as `overlay()` frequently adds additional edge attributes.
Use cases include:

* removing all edges that have a normalized google distance above/below a certain value `edge_attribute=ngd, direction=above, threshold=0.85` (i.e. remove edges that aren't represented well in the literature)
* removing all edges that Jaccard index above/below a certain value `edge_attribute=jaccard_index, direction=below, threshold=0.2` (i.e. all edges that have less than 20% of intermediate nodes in common)
* removing all edges with clinical information satisfying some condition `edge_attribute=chi_square, direction=above, threshold=.005` (i.e. all edges that have a chi square p-value above .005)
* etc. etc.
                
You have the option to either remove all connected nodes to such edges (via `remove_connected_nodes=t`), or
else, only remove a single source/target node based on a query node id (via `remove_connected_nodes=t, qnode_id=<a query node id.>`
                
This can be applied to an arbitrary knowledge graph as possible edge attributes are computed dynamically (i.e. not just those created/recognized by the ARA Expander team).


|||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| edge_attribute | direction | threshold | remove_connected_nodes | qnode_id |
|_DSL arguments_| {'an edge attribute name'} | {'below', 'above'} | {'a floating point number'} | {'False', 'T', 'F', 'true', 'True', 'f', 't', 'false'} | {'a specific query node id to remove'} |

## ARAX_messenger
### `create_message(action=None)`
The `create_message` method creates a basic empty Message object with basic boilerplate metadata
            such as reasoner_id, schema_version, etc. filled in.

|||
|-----|
|_DSL parameters_|  |
|_DSL arguments_|

### `create_message(action=None)`
The `add_qnode` method adds an additional QNode to the QueryGraph in the Message object. Currently
                when a curie or name is specified, this method will only return success if a matching node is found in the KG1 KGNodeIndex.

|||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| id | curie | name | type | is_set |
|_DSL arguments_| {'Any string that is unique among all QNode id fields, with recommended format n00, n01, n02, etc.'} | {'Any compact URI (CURIE) (e.g. DOID:9281, UniProtKB:P12345)'} | {'Any name of a bioentity that will be resolved into a CURIE if possible or result in an error if not (e.g. hypertension, insulin)'} | {'Any valid Translator bioentity type (e.g. protein, chemical_substance, disease)'} | {'If set to true, this QNode represents a set of nodes that are all in common between the two other linked QNodes'} |

### `create_message(action=None)`
The `add_qedge` method adds an additional QEdge to the QueryGraph in the Message object. Currently
                source_id and target_id QNodes must already be present in the QueryGraph. The specified type is not currently checked that it is a
                valid Translator/BioLink relationship type, but it should be.

||||||
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|_DSL parameters_| id | source_id | target_id | type |
|_DSL arguments_| {'Any string that is unique among all QEdge id fields, with recommended format e00, e01, e02, etc.'} | {'id of the source QNode already present in the QueryGraph (e.g. n01, n02)'} | {'id of the target QNode already present in the QueryGraph (e.g. n01, n02)'} | {'Any valid Translator/BioLink relationship type (e.g. physically_interacts_with, participates_in)'} |

